1.1 Themes and Concepts of Biology
Biology is the science that studies life. What exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question
with an obvious answer; however, it is not always easy to define life. For example, a branch of
biology called virology studies viruses. Viruses exhibit some of the characteristics of life but
lack others. It turns out that although viruses can attack living organisms, cause diseases, and
even reproduce with the help of host cells, they do not meet all the criteria that biologists use to
define life.
From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with four questions: What are the shared
properties that make something “alive”? How do those various living things function? Planet
2 Return to Table of Contents
earth has a diversity of life forms; how do we organize and classify these different organisms?
Finally, how did this diversity arise, and how is it continuing? As new organisms are discovered
every day, biologists continue to seek answers to these and other questions.
Properties of Life
All living organisms share the following key characteristics: order, response to stimuli,
reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, homeostasis, and energy processing. These
seven characteristics serve to define life. It is essential that students know these different
properties of life and be able to explain each.
Order
Organisms are highly organized and consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled
organisms are remarkably complex. Inside each cell, atoms come together through chemical
bonding and form molecules. Molecules come together to form cell components or structures
called organelles. Like the toad shown in Figure 1.2,
multicellular organisms can consist of millions of
cells. Different groups of cells then specialize in
performing specific functions. Without order,
specialization would not be possible.
Figure 1.2 A toad represents a highly organized
individual. (credit: "Ivengo(RUS)"/Wikimedia
Commons)
Response to Stimuli
Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light or
respond to touch (Figure 1.3). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals, a
process called chemotaxis. A movement toward a stimulus is considered a positive response,
while movement away from a stimulus is regarded as a negative response.
Humans also respond to stimuli. For example, when we become warm on a hot sunny day, the
body has tiny glands called sudoriferous, or sweat,
glands that make and release sweat onto the skin's
surface. The heat from the body can be transferred to
the sweat, which acts as a cooling mechanism and
helps to maintain constant body temperature.
Figure 1.3 The leaves of this sensitive plant (Mimosa
pudica) will instantly droop and fold when touched.
After a few minutes, the plant returns to its normal
state. (credit: Alex Lomas/Concepts of Biology
OpenStax)

Reproduction is necessary on both a cellular and organismal level. For a population to survive,
some individuals within that population must reproduce. Organisms that are multicellular, such
as plants and animals, also need to reproduce on a cellular level. As old cells become damaged or
worn out, they must be replaced by new cells. For example,
skin cells are damaged continuously and need to be replaced
every two to three weeks; otherwise, the skin would lose its
ability to provide protection.
Single-celled organisms must also reproduce. Reproduction
begins by first duplicating their genetic material. Once the
genetic material is duplicated, it is then divided equally into
two new cells (Figure 1.4). The two new daughter cells should
be identical to the parent cell.
Figure 1.4 Bacteria cell going through division. (credit:
Pradana Aumars/Wikimedia Commons)
Adaptation
All living organisms exhibit a “fit” to their environment. Biologists refer to this fit as
adaptation. Adaptations are a consequence of evolution by natural selection. Evolution has had
some impact on every lineage of reproducing organisms. Examples of adaptations are diverse
and unique. For example, some microorganisms live in boiling hot springs, whereas some moths
have tongues the exact length of the flower from which they feed.
Adaptations are vital because they enhance an individual's ability to survive and reproduce;
however, adaptations are not constant. As an environment changes, natural selection causes the
individuals in a population to adapt to those changes.
For example, imagine that there is a population of finches living on an island. An environmental
event has resulted in two main food sources: soft insects and hard seeds. Not all finches within
the population have the same beak length or size. Finches in the population that have long,
skinny beaks begin to feed on soft insects because they are easy for those birds to catch and eat.
Finches with large, more dense beaks feed on hard seeds because their dense beaks allow them to
4 Return to Table of Contents
crush and open the hard seeds. Unfortunately, finches that have beaks that are neither long nor
dense may slowly begin to decline in number because they are limited in their ability to obtain
nutrients. Finches that obtain food can put energy into reproduction and survival needs. When
those finches reproduce, they pass along those adaptations that allow them to be successful in
their respective feeding environments. Over time two distinct groups may arise, those with thick,
dense beaks and those with longer skinnier beaks (Figure 1.5). If these individuals genetically
change in such a way that they no longer can interbreed with one another, a speciation event will
have occurred.

Growth and Development
Development is often described as the processes that an individual goes through as it grows and
matures. For example, in humans, development begins once the sperm fertilizes the egg. Human
development can be broken down into different stages including embryonic development, fetal
development, infancy, childhood, puberty, and adulthood. Development can also be observed in
many other organisms. For example, butterflies go through a developmental process called
metamorphosis that begins at the egg stage and then proceeds to the larva, pupa, and adult stages.
Both multicellular and single-celled organisms grow and develop according to specific
instructions encoded in their DNA. DNA is organized into genes that provide information for
cellular growth and development. An individual's DNA ensures that a species’ young (Figure
1.6) will grow up to exhibit many of the same traits as its parents.